Deriving Variables
------------------

Derived variables are variables that, instead of having a column of
values backing them, are functionally dependent on other variables. In
Crunch, users with view-only permissions on a dataset can still make
derived variables of their own–just as they can make filters. Dataset
editors can also derive other types of variables as permanent additions
to the dataset, available for all viewers.

.. note::

    In this section, sample variable documents have been trimmed to the attributes essential to the derivation examples. Actual variable documents in the wild will have more attributes than those shown here.

.. _combining-categories:

Combining categories
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The "combine\_categories" function takes two arguments:

-  A reference to the categorical or categorical\_array variable to be
   combined
-  A definition of the categories of the new variable, including all
   members found in categories, plus a "combined\_ids" key that maps the
   derived category to one or more categories (by id) in the input
   variable.

Given a variable such as:

.. language_specific::
   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
          "element": "shoji:entity",
          "self": "https://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/3ad42c/variables/0000f5/",
          "body": {
              "name": "Education",
              "alias": "educ",
              "type": "categorical",
              "categories": [
                  {
                      "numeric_value": null,
                      "missing": true,
                      "id": -1,
                      "name": "No Data"
                  },
                  {
                      "numeric_value": 1,
                      "missing": false,
                      "id": 1,
                      "name": "No HS"
                  },
                  {
                      "numeric_value": 2,
                      "missing": false,
                      "id": 2,
                      "name": "High school graduate"
                  },
                  {
                      "numeric_value": 3,
                      "missing": false,
                      "id": 3,
                      "name": "Some college"
                  },
                  {
                      "numeric_value": 4,
                      "missing": false,
                      "id": 4,
                      "name": "2-year"
                  },
                  {
                      "numeric_value": 5,
                      "missing": false,
                      "id": 5,
                      "name": "4-year"
                  },
                  {
                      "numeric_value": 6,
                      "missing": false,
                      "id": 6,
                      "name": "Post-grad"
                  },
                  {
                      "numeric_value": 8,
                      "missing": true,
                      "id": 8,
                      "name": "Skipped"
                  },
                  {
                      "numeric_value": 9,
                      "missing": true,
                      "id": 9,
                      "name": "Not Asked"
                  }
              ],
              "description": "Education"
          }
      }


POST'ing to the private variables catalog a Shoji Entity containing a
ZCL function like:

.. language_specific::
   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
          "element": "shoji:entity",
          "body": {
              "name": "Education (3 category)",
              "description": "Combined from six-category education",
              "alias": "educ3",
              "derivation": {
                  "function": "combine_categories",
                  "args": [
                      {
                          "variable": "https://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/3ad42c/variables/0000f5/"
                      },
                      {
                          "value": [
                              {
                                  "name": "High school or less",
                                  "numeric_value": null,
                                  "id": 1,
                                  "missing": false,
                                  "combined_ids": [1, 2]
                              },
                              {
                                  "name": "Some college",
                                  "numeric_value": null,
                                  "id": 2,
                                  "missing": false,
                                  "combined_ids": [3, 4]
                              },
                              {
                                  "name": "4-year college or more",
                                  "numeric_value": null,
                                  "id": 3,
                                  "missing": false,
                                  "combined_ids": [5, 6]
                              },
                              {
                                  "name": "Missing",
                                  "numeric_value": null,
                                  "id": 4,
                                  "missing": true,
                                  "combined_ids": [8, 9]
                              },
                              {
                                  "name": "No data",
                                  "numeric_value": null,
                                  "id": -1,
                                  "missing": true,
                                  "combined_ids": [-1]
                              }
                          ]
                      }
                  ]
              }
          }
      }


results in a private categorical variable with three valid categories.

Combining the categories of a categorical array is the same as it is for
categorical variables. The resulting variable is also of type
"categorical\_array". This variable type also has a
"subvariables\_catalog", like the variable from which it is derived, and
the subvariables contained in it are derived "combine\_categories"
categorical variables.

.. _combining-responses:

Combining responses
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For multiple response variables, you may combine responses rather than
categories.

Given a variable such as:

.. language_specific::
   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
          "element": "shoji:entity",
          "self": "https://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/455288/variables/3c2e57/",
          "body": {
              "name": "Aided awareness",
              "alias": "aided",
              "subvariables": [
                  "../870a2d/",
                  "../a8b0eb/",
                  "../dc444f/",
                  "../8e6279/",
                  "../f775ab/",
                  "../6405c2/"
              ],
              "type": "multiple_response",
              "categories": [
                  {
                      "numeric_value": 1,
                      "selected": true,
                      "id": 1,
                      "name": "Selected",
                      "missing": false
                  },
                  {
                      "numeric_value": 2,
                      "id": 2,
                      "name": "Not selected",
                      "missing": false
                  },
                  {
                      "numeric_value": 8,
                      "id": 3,
                      "name": "Skipped",
                      "missing": true
                  },
                  {
                      "numeric_value": 9,
                      "id": 4,
                      "name": "Not asked",
                      "missing": true
                  },
                  {
                      "numeric_value": null,
                      "id": -1,
                      "name": "No data",
                      "missing": true
                  }
              ],
              "description": "Which of the following coffee brands do you recognize? Check all that apply."
          }
      }


POSTing to the variables catalog a Shoji Entity containing a ZCL
function like:

.. language_specific::
   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
          "element": "shoji:entity",
          "body": {
              "name": "Aided awareness by region",
              "description": "Combined from aided brand awareness",
              "alias": "aided_region",
              "derivation": {
                  "function": "combine_responses",
                  "args": [
                      {
                          "variable": "https://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/455288/variables/3c2e57/"
                      },
                      {
                          "value": [
                              {
                                  "name": "San Francisco",
                                  "combined_ids": [
                                      "../870a2d/",
                                      "../a8b0eb/",
                                      "../dc444f/"
                                  ]
                              },
                              {
                                  "name": "Portland",
                                  "combined_ids": [
                                      "../8e6279/",
                                      "../f775ab/"
                                  ]
                              },
                              {
                                  "name": "Chicago",
                                  "combined_ids": [
                                      "../6405c2/"
                                  ]
                              }
                          ]
                      }
                  ]
              }
          }
      }


results in a multiple response variable with three responses. The
"selected" state of the responses in the derived variable is an "OR" of
the combined subvariables.

.. _case-statements:

Case statements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The "case" function derives a variable using values from the first
argument. Each of the remaining arguments contains a boolean expression.
These are evaluated in order in an IF, ELSE IF, ELSE IF, ..., ELSE
fashion; the first one that matches selects the corresponding value from
the first argument. For example, if the first two boolean expressions do
not match (return False) but the third one matches, then the third value
in the first argument is placed into that row in the output. You may
include an extra value for the case when none of the boolean expressions
match; if not provided, it defaults to the system "No Data" missing
value.

.. language_specific::
   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
          "element": "shoji:entity",
          "body": {
              "name": "Market segmentation",
              "description": "Super-scientific classification of people",
              "alias": "segments",
              "derivation": {
                  "function": "case",
                  "args": [
                      {
                          "column": [1, 2, 3, 4],
                          "type": {
                              "value": {
                                  "class": "categorical",
                                  "categories": [
                                      {"id": 3, "name": "Hipsters", "numeric_value": null, "missing": false},
                                      {"id": 1, "name": "Techies", "numeric_value": null, "missing": false},
                                      {"id": 2, "name": "Yuppies", "numeric_value": null, "missing": false},
                                      {"id": 4, "name": "Other", "numeric_value": null, "missing": true}
                                  ]
                              }
                          }
                      },
                      {
                          "function": "and",
                          "args": [
                              {"function": "in", "args": [{"variable": "55fc29/"}, {"value": [5, 6]}]},
                              {"function": "<=", "args": [{"variable": "673dde/"}, {"value": 30}]}
                          ]
                      },
                      {
                          "function": "and",
                          "args": [
                              {"function": "in", "args": [{"variable": "889dc3/"}, {"value": [4, 5, 6]}]},
                              {"function": ">", "args": [{"variable": "673dde/"}, {"value": 40}]}
                          ]
                      },
                      {"function": "==", "args": [{"variable": "13cbf4/"}, {"value": 1}]}
                  ]
              }
          }
      }


Making ad hoc arrays
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is possible to create derived arrays reusing subvariables from other
arrays using the ``array`` function and indicating the reference for
each of its subvariables.

The subvariables of an array are specified using the ``select``
function, with its first ``map`` argument indicating the IDs for each of
these virtual subvariables. These IDs are user defined and can be any
string. They remain unique inside the parent variable so they can be
reused between different arrays. The second argument of the ``select``
function indicates the order of the subvariables in the array. They are
referenced by the user defined IDs.

Each of its variables must point to a variable expression, which can
take an optional (but recommended) ``references`` attribute to specify a
particular name and alias for the subvariable, if not specified, the
same name from the original will be used and the alias will be padded to
ensure uniqueness.

.. language_specific::
   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
        "CA3": {
          "name": "cat array 3",
          "derivation": {
            "function": "array",
            "args": [
              {
                "function": "select",
                "args": [
                  {
                    "map": {
                      "var1": {
                        "variable": "ca2-subvar-2",
                        "references": {
                          "alias": "subvar2",
                          "name": "Subvar 2"
                        }
                      },
                      "var0": {
                        "variable": "ca1-subvar-1",
                        "references": {
                          "alias": "subvar1",
                          "name": "Subvar 1"
                        }
                      }
                    }
                  },
                  {
                    "value": [
                      "var1",
                      "var0"
                    ]
                  }
                ]
              }
            ]
          }
        },
        "CA2": {
          "subvariables": [
            {
              "alias": "ca2-subvar-1",
              "name": "ca2-subvar-1"
            },
            {
              "alias": "ca2-subvar-2",
              "name": "ca2-subvar-2"
            }
          ],
          "type": "categorical_array",
          "name": "cat array 2",
          "categories": [
            {
              "numeric_value": null,
              "missing": false,
              "id": 1,
              "name": "yes"
            },
            {
              "numeric_value": null,
              "missing": false,
              "id": 2,
              "name": "no"
            },
            {
              "numeric_value": null,
              "missing": true,
              "id": -1,
              "name": "No Data"
            }
          ]
        },
        "CA1": {
          "subvariables": [
            {
              "alias": "ca1-subvar-1",
              "name": "ca1-subvar-1"
            },
            {
              "alias": "ca1-subvar-2",
              "name": "ca1-subvar-2"
            },
            {
              "alias": "ca1-subvar-3",
              "name": "ca1-subvar-3"
            }
          ],
          "type": "categorical_array",
          "name": "cat array 1",
          "categories": [
            {
              "numeric_value": null,
              "missing": false,
              "id": 1,
              "name": "yes"
            },
            {
              "numeric_value": null,
              "missing": false,
              "id": 2,
              "name": "no"
            },
            {
              "numeric_value": null,
              "missing": true,
              "id": -1,
              "name": "No Data"
            }
          ]
        }
      }


On the above example, the array ``CA3`` uses the array function and uses
subvariables ``ca1-subvar-1`` and ``ca2-subvar-2`` from ``CA1`` and
``CA2`` respectively. The ``references`` attribute is used to indicate
specific name/alias for these subvariables.

.. raw:: html

   <aside class="warning">

Note that when making an array with this method its subvariables catalog
and subvariables will return 405 on PATCH attempts. The correct way to
make modifications to them (add/remove subvariable, edit subvariable
attributes) is to update the new array variable's entity ``derivation``
attribute with the updated expression indicating the desired subvariable
modifications.

.. raw:: html

   </aside>

.. _feature-deriving-weights:

Weights
~~~~~~~

A numeric variable suitable for use as row weights can be constructed
from one or more categorical variables and target proportions of their
categories. The sample distribution is “raked” iteratively to each
categorical marginal target to produce a set of joint values that can be
used as weights. Note that available weight variables are shared by all;
you may not create private weights. To create a weight variable, POST a
JSON variable definition to the variables catalog describing the
properties of the weight variable, with an "derivation" member
indicating to use the "rake" function, which takes arguments containing
an array of variable targets:

.. language_specific::
   --Shell
   .. code:: shell

      POST /api/datasets/{datasetid}/variables/ HTTP/1.1
      Content-Type: application/shoji
      Content-Length: 739
      {
          "name": "weight",
          "description": "my raked weight",
          "derivation": {
              "function": "rake",
              "args": [{
                  "variable": variabl1.id,
                  "targets": [[1, 0.491], [2, 0.509]]
              }]
          }
      }
      ---------
      201 Created
      Location: /api/datasets/{datasetid}/variables/{variableid}/


Multiple Response Views
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The "select\_categories" function allows you to form a multiple response
array from a categorical array, or alter the "selected" categories in an
existing multiple response array. It takes two arguments:

-  A reference to a categorical or categorical\_array variable
-  A list of the category ids or category names to mark as "selected"

Given a variable such as:

.. language_specific::
   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
          "element": "shoji:entity",
          "self": "https://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/3ad42c/variables/0000f5/",
          "body": {
              "name": "Cola",
              "alias": "cola",
              "type": "categorical",
              "categories": [
                  {"id": -1, "name": "No Data", "numeric_value": null, "missing": true},
                  {"id": 0, "name": "Never", "numeric_value": null, "missing": false},
                  {"id": 1, "name": "Sometimes", "numeric_value": null, "missing": false},
                  {"id": 2, "name": "Frequently", "numeric_value": null, "missing": false},
                  {"id": 3, "name": "Always", "numeric_value": null, "missing": false}
              ],
              "subvariables": ["0001", "0002", "0003"],
              "references": {
                  "subreferences": {
                      "0003": {"alias": "Coke"},
                      "0002": {"alias": "Pepsi"},
                      "0001": {"alias": "RC"}
                  }
              }
          }
      }


POST'ing to the private variables catalog a Shoji Entity containing a
ZCL function like:

.. language_specific::
   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
          "element": "shoji:entity",
          "body": {
              "name": "Cola likes",
              "description": "Cola preferences",
              "alias": "cola_likes",
              "derivation": {
                  "function": "select_categories",
                  "args": [
                      {"variable": "https://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/3ad42c/variables/0000f5/"},
                      {"value": [2, 3]}
                  ]
              }
          }
      }


...results in a private multiple\_response variable where the
"Frequently" and "Always" categories are selected.

Text Analysis
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sentiment Analysis
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The "sentiment" function allows you to derive a categorical variable
from text variable data, which is classified and accumulated in three
categories (positive, negative, and neutral). It takes one parameter:

-  A reference to a text variable

Given a variable such as:

.. language_specific::
   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
          "element": "shoji:entity",
          "self": "https://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/3ad42c/variables/0000f5/",
          "body": {
              "name": "Zest",
              "alias": "zest",
              "type": "text",
              "values": [
                  "Zest is best",
                  "Zest I can take it or leave it",
                  "Zest is the worst"
              ]
          }
      }


``POST``\ ing to the private variables catalog a Shoji Entity containing
a ZCL function like:

.. language_specific::
   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
          "element": "shoji:entity",
          "body": {
              "name": "Zesty Sentiment",
              "description": "Customer sentiment about Zest",
              "alias": "zest_sentiment",
              "derivation": {
                  "function": "sentiment",
                  "args": [
                      {"variable": "https://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/3ad42c/variables/0000f5/"}
                  ]
              }
          }
      }


Will result in a new categorical variable, where for each row the text
variable is classified as “Negative”, “Neutral”, or “Positive” using the
`VADER <https://github.com/cjhutto/vaderSentiment>`__ English
social-media-tuned lexicon.

Other transformations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Arithmetic operations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

It is possible to create new numeric variables out of pairs of other
numeric variables. The following arithmetic operations are available and
will take two numeric variables as their arguments.

-  "+" for adding up two numeric variables.
-  "-" returns the difference between two numeric variables.
-  "\*" for the product of two numeric variables.
-  "/" Real division.
-  "//" Floor division; Returns always an integer.
-  "^" Raises the first argument to the power of the second argument
-  "%" Modulo operation; Accepts floats

The usage is as follows for all operators:

.. language_specific::
   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
          "function": "+",
          "args": [
              {"variable": "https://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/123/variables/abc/"}
              {"variable": "https://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/123/variables/def/"}
          ]
      }


bin
^^^

Receives a numeric variable and returns a categorical one where each
category represents a bin of the numeric values.

Each category on the new variable is annotated with a "boundaries"
member that contains the lower/upper bound of each bin.

.. language_specific::
   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
          "function": "bin",
          "args": [
              {"variable": "https://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/123/variables/abc/"}
          ]
      }


Optionally it is possible to pass a second argument indicating the
desired bin size to use instead of allowing the API to decide them.

.. language_specific::
   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
          "function": "bin",
          "args": [
              {"variable": "https://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/123/variables/abc/"},
              {'value': 100}
          ]
      }


case
^^^^

Returns a categorical variable with its categories following the
specified conditions from different variables on the dataset. See :ref:`Case
Statements <case-statements>`.

cast
^^^^

Returns a new variable with its type and values casted. Not applicable
on arrays or date variable; use :ref:`Date Functions <date-Functions>` to
work with date variables.

.. language_specific::
   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
          "function": "cast",
          "args": [
              {"variable": "https://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/123/variables/abc/"},
              {"value": "numeric"}
          ]
      }


The allowed output variable types are:

-  numeric
-  text
-  categorical

For categorical types it is necessary to indicate the categories as a
type definition instead of a string name:

To cast to categorical type, the second argument ``value`` should not be
a name string (``numeric``, ``text``) but a type definition indicating a
``class`` and ``categories`` as follow:

.. language_specific::
   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
          "function": "cast",
          "args": [
              {"variable": "https://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/123/variables/abc/"},
              {"value": {
                      "class": "categorical",
                      "categories": [
                          {"id": 1, "name": "one", "missing": false, "numeric_value": null},
                          {"id": 2, "name": "two", "missing": false, "numeric_value": null},
                          {"id": -1, "name": "No Data", "missing": true, "numeric_value": null},
                      ]
                  }
              }
          ]
      }


To change the type of a variable a client should POST to the
``/variable/:id/cast/`` endpoint. See :ref:`Convert type <convert-type>`
for API examples.

char\_length
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Returns a numeric variable containing the text length of each value.
Only applicable on text variables.

.. language_specific::
   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
          "function": "char_length",
          "args": [
              {"variable": "https://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/123/variables/abc/"}
          ]
      }


copy\_variable
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Returns a shallow copy of the indicated variable maintaining type and
data.

.. language_specific::
   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
          "function": "copy_variable",
          "args": [
              {"variable": "https://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/123/variables/abc/"}
          ]
      }


Changes on the data of the original variable will be reflected on this
copy.

combine\_categories
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Returns a categorical variable with values combined following the
specified combination rules. See :ref:`Combining
categories <combining-categories>`.

combine\_responses
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Given a list of categorical variables, return the selected value out of
them. See :ref:`Combining responses <combining-responses>`.

row
^^^

Returns a numeric variable with row 0 based indices. It takes no
arguments.

.. language_specific::
   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
          "function": "row",
          "args": []
      }


remap\_missing
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Given a text, numeric or datetime variable. return a new variable of the
same type with its missing values mapped to new codes

.. language_specific::
   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
        "function": "remap_missing",
        "args": [
          {"variable": "varid"},
          {"value": [
              {
                  "reason": "Combined 1 and 2",
                  "code": 1,
                  "mapped_codes": [1, 2]
              },
              {
                  "reason": "Only 3",
                  "code": 2,
                  "mapped_codes": [3]
              },
              {
                  "reason": "No Data",
                  "code": -1,
                  "mapped_codes": [-1]
              }
          ]}
        ]
      }


The example above will return a copy of the variable with id ``varid``
with the new ``missing_reasons`` grouping and mapping following the
original codes.

Integrating variables
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

"Integrating" a variable means to remove its derived properties and turn
it into a regular *base* variable. Doing so will make this variable stop
reflecting the expression if new data is added to its original parent
variable and new rows will be filled with No Data ``{"?": -1}``.

To integrate a variable it is necessary to PATCH to the variable entity
with the ``derived`` attribute set to ``false`` as so:

.. language_specific::
   --HTTP
   .. code:: http

      PATCH /api/dataset/abc/variables/123/

   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
        "element": "shoji:entity",
        "body": {
          "derived": false
        }
      }


Will effectively integrate the variable and make its ``derivation``
attribute contain ``null`` from now in. Note that it is only possible to
set the ``derived`` attribute to ``false`` and never to ``true``.

Creating unlinked derivations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

It is possible to create a material copy, or one off copy of a variable
or an expression of it.

To create such variables, proceed normally creating a derived variable
with the derivation expression, but also include ``derived: false``
attribute to it. So the variable will be created with the values of the
expression but will be unlinked from the original variable.

.. language_specific::
   --HTTP
   .. code:: http

      POST /api/dataset/abc/variables/


