Joins
-----

.. warning::

    Joins are an experimental feature. Beware when using it, and expect
    significant future changes. To instead add a snapshot of columns to a
    dataset, see the "Extend" feature guide. This feature is more stable
    than the dynamic join described here.

Catalog
~~~~~~~

``/datasets/{id}/joins/``

A GET on this resource returns a Shoji Catalog enumerating the joins
present in the Dataset. Each tuple in the index includes a "left\_key"
and a "right\_key" member, each of which MUST be a variable URI. The
left\_key MUST be a variable in the current dataset, and the right\_key
SHOULD be a variable in another dataset. Both variables MUST be unique,
and should be values taken from the same domain. For example, you might
have a principal dataset which is a survey, with a respondent\_id
variable as a unique key. If you join a separate demographic dataset
that has a unique column of the same respondent ids, you might see:

.. language_specific::
   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
          "element": "shoji:catalog",
          "self": "https://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/837498a/joins/",
          "index": {
              "https://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/837498a/joins/demo/": {
                  "left_key": "https://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/837498a/variables/1ef71d/",
                  "right_key": "https://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/de3095/variables/19471d/"
              }
          }
      }


A PATCH to this resource may add joins (by including new index members),
alter existing joins (by replacing existing index members), or deleting
joins (by setting existing members to null). A 204 indicates success. As
with any Shoji Catalog, the URI of each entity in the index is the key.

Variables in joined datasets may then be used in analyses as if they
were part of the principal dataset, simply by using their URI in this
join's variables catalog (see below). The joined dataset includes one
row for each row in the principal dataset, by taking the key in the
principal and looking up the corresponding key and row in the
subordinate dataset. Rows in the principal which have no corresponding
row in the subordinate are filled with the "No Data" missing value.

In order to create or alter a new join, the authenticated user will need
to have reading access to the right dataset otherwise the server will
respond with a 400 error.

The variable url sent for the left key must be a valid url for the
current dataset. It is not allowed to use a different dataset as a left
table.

Entity
~~~~~~

``/datasets/{id}/joins/{id}/``

A GET on this resource returns a Shoji Entity describing the join, and a
link to its Crunch Table (see next). Currently, the Join entity only
contains the batch\_id for its frame, and therefore isn't very useful
for clients. The entity resource is not editable; PATCH the joins
catalog instead.

Joined variables catalog
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``/datasets/{id}/joins/{id}/variables/``

A variables catalog which describes variables in the subordinate
dataset. See :doc:`Variables </endpoint-reference/endpoint-variable>` for more
details.
