Filters
-------

Catalog
~~~~~~~

``/datasets/{id}/filters/``

GET on this resource returns a Shoji Catalog with the list of Filters
that the current user can use on this Dataset.

This index contains two kinds of filters: public and private, denoted by
the ``is_public`` tuple attribute. Private filters are those created by
the authenticated user, and they cannot be accessed by other users.
Public filters are available to all users who are authorized to view the
dataset.

.. language_specific::
   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
          "name": "My filter",
          "is_public": true,
          "id": "1442ea",
          "owner_id": "https://app.crunch.io/api/users/4152de/",
          "team": "https://app.crunch.io/api/teams/680abc/"
      }


The only tuple attribute editable via PATCHing the catalog is the
"name". A 204 response indicates a successful PATCH. Attempting to PATCH
any other attribute will return a 400 response.

POST a Shoji Entity to this catalog to create a new filter. Entities
must include a ``name`` and an ``expression``. If omitted, ``is_public``
defaults to False. A successful POST yields a 201 response that will
contain a Location header with the URL of the newly created filter.

All users with access to the dataset can create private filters;
however, only the current dataset editor can create public filters
(``is_public: true``). Attempting to create a public filter when not the
current dataset editor results in a 403 response.

Entity
~~~~~~

``/datasets/{id}/filters/{id}/``

GET this resource to return a Shoji Entity containing the requested
filter.

.. language_specific::
   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
          "element": "shoji:entity",
          "self": "https://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/ac64ef/filters/1442ea/",
          "body": {
              "id": "1442ea",
              "name": "My filter",
              "is_public": true,
              "expression": {},
              "last_update": "2015-12-31",
              "creation_time": "2015-11-12T12:34:56",
              "team": "https://app.crunch.io/api/teams/680abc/"
          }
      }


PATCH an entity to edit its ``expression``, ``name``, ``team`` or
``is_public`` attributes. Successful PATCH requests return 204 status.
As with the POSTing new entities to the catalog, only the dataset's
current editor can alter a filter.

The ``expression`` attribute must contain a valid Crunch filter
expression.

The ``team`` attribute will point to the team this filter is shared
with, in case it isn't shared with any teams, it will default to
``null``.

.. raw:: html

   <!-- Discuss valid crunch filter expressions -->

See :ref:`expressions <expressions-obj-ref>` in the Object Reference for more
details.

Applied filters
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``/datasets/{id}/filters/applied/``

A Shoji order containing the filters applied by the current user.

.. language_specific::
   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
          "element": "shoji:order",
          "self": "http://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/ac64ef/filters/applied/",
          "graph": [
              "http://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/ac64ef/filters/28ef72/",
              "http://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/ac64ef/filters/0ac6e1/",
          ]
      }


PUT the applied endpoint to change the which filters are applied for
other operations. The graph parameter indicates which filters are
applied. Successful PUT requests return 204 status.

Filter Order
~~~~~~~~~~~~

``GET /datasets/{id}/filters/order/``

A Shoji order containing the persisted filter order.

.. language_specific::
   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
          "element": "shoji:order",
          "self": "http://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/ac64ef/filters/order/",
          "graph": [
              "http://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/ac64ef/filters/28ef72/",
              "http://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/ac64ef/filters/0ac6e1/",
          ]
      }


PATCH the order to change the order of the filters. The graph parameter
indicates the order. Private filters are not included in the order. Any
filters that are missing are appended to the end of the order.
Successful PATCH requests return 204 status.

.. _filtering-endpoints:

Filtering endpoints
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Some endpoints will support filtering, they will accept a ``filter`` GET
parameter that can be a JSON encoded object that can contain either the
URL of a filter (available through the Filters catalog) or a filter
expression or a filter URL.

To filter using a filter URL using JSON pass in an object as the
``filter`` parameter:

.. language_specific::
   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
          "filter": "http://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/ac64ef/filters/28ef72/"
      }

   --HTTP
   .. code:: http

      GET /datasets/id/summary/?filter=%7B%22filter%22%3A%22http%3A%2F%2Fapp.crunch.io%2Fapi%2Fdatasets%2Fac64ef%2Ffilters%2F28ef72%2F%22%7D HTTP/1.1


It is also possible to send straight filter URLs without a JSON
wrapping:

.. language_specific::
   --HTTP
   .. code:: http

      GET /datasets/id/summary/?filter=http%3A%2F%2Fapp.crunch.io%2Fapi%2Fdatasets%2Fac64ef%2Ffilters%2F28ef72%2F HTTP/1.1


Or multiple filters that will be ANDed together

.. language_specific::
   --HTTP
   .. code:: http

      GET /datasets/id/summary/?filter=http%3A%2F%2Fapp.crunch.io%2Fapi%2Fdatasets%2Fac64ef%2Ffilters%2F28ef72%2F&filter=http%3A%2F%2Fapp.crunch.io%2Fapi%2Fdatasets%2Fac64ef%2Ffilters%2F28ef72%2F HTTP/1.1


To filter using a filter expression, pass a Crunch filter expression as
the ``filter`` parameter, like:

.. language_specific::
   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
          "function": "==",
          "args": [
              {"variable": "http://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/ac64ef/variables/aae3c2/"},
              {"value": 1}
          ]
      }

   --HTTP
   .. code:: http

      GET /datasets/id/summary/?filter=%7B%22function%22%3A%22%3D%3D%22%2C%22args%22%3A%5B%7B%22variable%22%3A%22http%3A%2F%2Fapp.crunch.io%2Fapi%2Fdatasets%2Fac64ef%2Fvariables%2Faae3c2%2F%22%7D%2C%7B%22value%22%3A1%7D%5D%7D HTTP/1.1


Filter expressions can be combined with filter URLs to make reference to
other filters, like so:

.. language_specific::
   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
          "function": "and",
          "args": [
              {
                  "filter": "http://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/ac64ef/filters/28ef72/"
              },
             {
                  "function": "==",
                  "args": [
                      {"variable": "http://app.crunch.io/api/datasets/ac64ef/variables/aae3c2/"},
                      {"value": 1}
                  ]
              }
          ]
      }


