.. _multitables-main:

Multitables
-----------

.. _multitables-catalog:

Catalog
~~~~~~~

``/datasets/{dataset_id}/multitables/``

GET
^^^

.. language_specific::
   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
          "element": "shoji:catalog",
          "self": "/api/datasets/123/multitables/",
          "specification": "/api/specifications/multitables/",
          "description": "List of multitable definitions for this dataset",
          "index": {
              "/api/datasets/123/multitables/7ab1e/": {
                  "is_public": false,
                  "owner_id": "/api/users/b055/",
                  "name": "Basic Demographics",
                  "id": "7ab1e",
                  "team": "/api/teams/56789/"
              }
          }
      }


GET on this resource returns a Shoji Catalog with the list of
Multitables that the current user can use on this Dataset.

This index contains two kinds of multitables: those that belong to the
dataset, denoted by the ``is_public`` tuple attribute; and those that
belong to the current user. Personal multitables are those created by
the authenticated user, and they cannot be accessed by other users.
Dataset multitables are available to all users who are authorized to
view the dataset.

POST
^^^^

POST a Shoji Entity to this catalog to create a new multitable
definition. Entities must include a ``name`` and ``template``; the
:ref:`template <template-query>` must contain a series of objects with a
``query`` and optionally
```transform`` <#transforming-analyses-for-presentation>`__. If omitted,
``is_public`` defaults to ``false``. In similar fashion, ``team`` will
default to ``null`` unless a specific team URL is provided.

A successful POST yields a 201 response that will contain a Location
header with the URL of the newly created multitable.

All users with access to the dataset can create personal multitable
definitions; however, only the current dataset editor can create public
multitables (``is_public: true``) which everyone with access to the
dataset can see. Attempting to create a public multitable when not the
current dataset editor results in a 403 response.

Copying Multitables between datasets
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

It is possible to copy over a multitables between datasets as long as
the permissions allow it.

Multitable copying requires that all the variables present in the
``template`` of the origin multitable exist on the target dataset and
that they all have the same type. Copied multitables will be private by
default.

POST a shoji entity to the catalog with indicating the URL of the
multitable to copy:

.. language_specific::
   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
          "element": "shoji:entity",
          "body": {
              "name": "Name of my copy",
              "multitable": "/api/datasets/123/multitables/7ab1e/"
          }
      }


As shown in the example, it is possible to assign a new name to the
copy. By default all copies will be private unless specified in the
body.

PATCH
^^^^^

There are no elements of the catalog that can be changed via PATCH.

Entity
~~~~~~

``/datasets/{dataset_id}/multitables/{multitable_id}/``

GET
^^^

.. language_specific::
   --JSON
   .. code:: json

      {
          "element": "shoji:entity",
          "self": "datasets/123/multitables/7ab1e/",
          "views": {
              "tabbook": "/datasets/123/multitables/7ab1e/tabbook/"
          },
          "specification": "https://app.crunch.io/api/specifications/multitables/",
          "description": "Detail information for one multitable definition",
          "body": {
              "name": "Basic Demographics",
              "user": "/api/users/b055/",
              "template": [{
                  "query": [{
                      "variable": "/datasets/123/variables/abc/"
                  }]
              }, {
                  "query": [{
                      "variable": "/datasets/123/variables/def/"
                  }]
              }],
              "is_public": false,
              "id": "7ab1e",
              "team": "/api/teams/56789/"
          }
      }


GET on this resource returns a Shoji entity containing the requested
multitable definition.

PATCH
^^^^^

PATCH the entity to edit its ``name``, ``template``, ``team`` or
``is_public`` attributes. Successful PATCH requests return 204 status.
As with the POSTing new entities to the catalog, only the dataset's
current editor can alter ``is_public``.

The ``template`` attribute must contain a valid multitable definition.

Views
^^^^^

Multitable entities have a "tabbook" view. See below.
